Let's now work on creating foot roll reg for the character's feet I'm going to select one of these bones
here and zoom in.
And what I want to do is have the ability to roll the foot forward while keeping the toe planted on
the ground.
And also I want the ability to be able to roll the foot back while keeping the heel planted on the ground.
So let's take a look at how we might create that.
We're going to need to create a few extra bones here to be able to control that motion.
So let's go back into edit mode here.
And if I selected this joint right here I'm going to go in and close the properties panel.
Now I'm going to select that joint there and press shift ass and snap the cursor to the selected and
I want to create a bone right here.
So I'm going to press shift a and there it is.
So now I'm going to go to my side view with the three key and orthographic view with the five key and
I'm going to press the G key and I'm a whole down control.
And as I move this down it all snap to the grid.
So I want it to be right about
right about here.
Now I want to while this is selected I want to snap the cursor to that.
So I'll move the cursor there and I'm going to press shift day to create a new bone and I want to do
the same thing here I'm going to press the G key.
Hold the control key down to snap to the grid and move this back to about right here.
Now I need to rotate this bone back so that the tip is here and the root of the bone is here.
So what I'll do is press R hold down the control key and spin it around until it snaps right there and
click.
Now I just need to create two more bones and those bones need to be based out of the ankle joint.
So I'll move the cursor to that press shift a and for this one I'm going to press g hold the control
key down and I want to bring it out straight back about like that.
And then I want to create one more bone I'll de-select the bones press shift a.
And now this one I want to hit the press control and bring all the way down and have it go straight
down like this.
All right.
So those are the bones we need to create this foot control rig we need this bone.
So the foot can rotate up at this joint leaving the toe on the ground.
We need this bone so the heel can rotate back.
At this point we need this bone to control those two movements and we need this bone here to move the
entire thing to be the main foot control to move the entire foot and leg around.
So let's name these bring the properties panel back and for this one let's call this toe roll.
Al for the one at the heel Let's call this heel roll.
Al this went up here we can call foot roll control.
Well and this one down here we'll call foot control.
So now we're going to need to do some parenting to get this all working correctly.
The first thing imma do is parent the foot I.K. let me tumble around to choose that.
Here it is.
I need to parent this foot.
I k bone to the toe so I'll select that foot.
I.K. shift select the toe roll control press control P and keep offset.
Now I need this leg.
The toe roll bone shifts select the heel roll and control the and keep offset and then I'm going to
Slyke this heel roll and shift select the foot roll control and then I'm going to parent.
Both of these two this main foot control here saw shift select that and press control P and keep offset.
Now theoretically if I go to pose mode and select this bone now I should be able to hit the G key and
move this whole thing around all right.
So now we need to add our constraints.
What I need to do is select this toe roll bone add a copy constraint
and for the target We'll of course choose armature.
And for this we need to choose that foot roll control like that will choose local space for both of
these and we'll turn off the Y and Z so that it only rolls in the x axis.
So to test this let me select this bone and I'm going to turn on my rotation manipulators here and I'm
going to roll this now in the x axis and you can see how as I roll that foot roll control bone it rolls
that foot forward.
Now we need to limit that constraint so let's go ahead and add a new constraint to the Toban here.
I'll add a constraint.
Limit rotation and for this LIT's limited in the X and let's set a maximum here of say 45 degrees and
we'll change this to local space.
So now if I choose that foot roll control and roll it forward you can see that after a certain point
it does not affect it.
All right let's do the same thing for the heel now we want to set up a copy rotation constraint for
this as well.
So I'll come over here create a copy rotation constraint.
The target will be armature the bone will be the foot roll control.
It gets all weird here so let's switch it to local space and that should help.
Let's turn off the Z and the Y and for this we want to have it roll in the opposite direction so we're
going to check invert here.
Now let's also add limit rotation constraint here just like we did before.
Well choose local space will limit it in the X and put in 45 degrees.
And let's test this.
So if I roll forward he rolls up on his toe right there on the toe joint.
But if I roll it back now it's not working.
And why is that what we want.
Is this heel to roll up.
It seems to be rolling down.
Well let's do it.
Let's take a look at the bone roll.
So going to go back into edit mode and take a look at this bone right here.
Now if you recall when we go back to here and look at the axes remember we dealt with the X season when
we were creating the reg.
And right now the positive is rolling down c toward the Z.
We're rotating in the x axis and the positive is toward the Z what we actually want is we want the positive
to be pointing up.
So if you look here the roll of this bone is 180 degrees.
I flipped it around when I created it.
So what we want to do is we want to zero out the roll of the x axis.
Let me turn axes off here for a minute and if I select this bone in edit mode and press control in.
Now I've got selection of ways to recalculate the bone roll and what I want is this local x tangent
so I'll click this.
And now that roll has been zeroed out.
All right.
So let's go back now to pose mode and then select this bone.
And if I roll it forward we get that.
And if I roll it back.
Now we get the proper role of the heel.
So that's all that was was just I needed to recalculate or zero out the roll of that particular bone.
All right.
So we're almost done with our foot roll here.
What we need now is when this rolls forward we need the toe to stay planted on the ground so to keep
this toe planted on the ground let's select it and let's add a bone constraint and let's use a copy
rotation constraint right here.
And for our target let's choose the armature and for the bone all target that toe roll bone.
Now it's going to flip around and that looks painful but let's change it to local space and that should
help let's turn off the Y and Z here and for this one instead of choosing Inver Let's check offset.
So let me select this bone and rotate it forward.
Now you've got the toe planted on the ground.
Let's roll it back.
And now you've got the heel planted on the ground.
So you have a nice foot roll there that really helps when you're trying to animate with a walk or a
run or something like that.
The last part of controlling the leg here is going to be controlling the knee angle what we need is
a bone out here in front of the knee that will allow us to point the knee in the direction that we want.
So if I'm going to move say the leg like this perhaps I'd want this need to point over the foot to create
something like that.
Let's go into edit mode again and select this joint.
I'll snap the cursor to it and I'll go ahead and create a bone there with shift a.
So now with this bone selected I'm going to go to my move tool and I just want to move it straight out
straight out from that knee there and I'll give this a name.
Call this knee control doc.
So what we're really doing with this is controlling the angle of the I.K. chain.
So going to go back into pose mode and select that lower leg bone where the I.K. constraint is.
And if you see here you've got a field called Pole target and that if we choose the armature and then
the bone knee I'll choose the control that will now point the knee at that bone.
But the problem is is it's not pointed exactly at it.
We need to adjust this pole angle field if I click and drag in here I can rotate that knee so it points
more at that object.
So let's test this.
I'm going to select the leg and move it up and then I'm going to move this over and let's get this knee
pointed right at that let me adjust the pole angle a bit so it points right at that bone.
There you go.
So it looks like for me the pole angle is going to be negative 50 so I'm going to zero out the location
or transform of all the bone so disliked everything with a in posed mode and press alt G and that will
move everything back to its original position.
So now I can move the leg here.
I can roll the foot forward and back.
And I can move the knee around as well.
Now I should probably parent this need to the foot so it doesn't get lost in the scene when we're moving
the whole character around.
So I'll go back to edit mode here and select the control and then I'll shift select that main foot control
down here press control P and keep offset.
So now if I go back to pose mode I can see that that Niek control follows along.
And then once it's in place I can select it and move it around as well.
All right alt G.
And we're back.
So I will go ahead and complete the foot roll rig on the other foot as well as the knee control.
But in the next video we'll work on setting up an exchange for the arms and controls for the fingers.